KISS Peer discovery, KISS Bootstrapping, Nodes auto-stake/unstake via K8S cluster-manager, Node Finite state machine - Issues #416, #490, #429, #498, #499 (#491)
pokt-network/pocket: state_machine/docs/README.md

# State Machine Module

This document outlines the purpose of this module, its components and how they all interact with the other modules.

## Contents <!-- omit in toc -->
- [State Machine Module](#state-machine-module)
  - [Overview](#overview)
  - [Code Structure](#code-structure)
  - [High Level Architecture](#high-level-architecture)
    - [FSM primer](#fsm-primer)
  - [Current State Machine Definition](#current-state-machine-definition)

## Overview

> The `StateMachine` module implements a FSM (Finite State Machine) that is responsible for managing the node lifecycle since its internal behaviour can be different depending on certain conditions that are used to determine the current state.

Reviewer: We have an FSM (Finite State Machine) to run a RSM (Replicated State Machine): https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/State_machine_replication

Author: Correct

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/29378614/218770289-68382d2c-7a2e-4a50-bbd2-32b0a0219a3b.png)

> TL;DR: When you are in a state, you can only transition to other states that are allowed by the fsm definition.

Reviewer: Pro tip: Put the `tl;dr` at the top of the section, then you don't have to read the actual contents and capture the reader's attention.

Reviewer: `tl;dr The FSM guarantees that the node is always in one specific state and verifies state transition (i.e. edges) to/from valid states (i.e. veriticies).`

I find that this helps me easily draw a graph analogy in my head.

Transitions happen reacting to events.

## Code Structure

```bash
├── docs
│   ├── CHANGELOG.md              # Changelog

> │   ├── README.md                 # You are here

Reviewer: ![giphy](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1892194/218605427-5f23e06a-9f58-40b2-8155-dbe47d15be92.gif)

│   └── state-machine.diagram.md  # State machine diagram (generated by visualizer/main.go)
├── fsm.go                        # Finite State Machine definition (events, states, transitions)
├── module.go                     # Implementation of the StateMachine module
└── visualizer
    └── main.go                   # State machine diagram generator
```

## High Level Architecture

> ⚠️ Work in progress ⚠️ - At the time of writing this document, the architecture is still being defined.

Reviewer: I think you should put this at the very top of the README. Ditto regarding the POC statement.

This is pretty much a POC at the moment.

The key things to keep in mind are:

- We are using the library "github.com/looplab/fsm" to implement the FSM, essentially here we are wrapping it and integrating it with the rest of the modules. This document won't cover the implementation details of the FSM library which is fairly well documented.

> - The **StateMachineModule** can be accessed via the `bus` from any other `IntegratableModule`

Reviewer: 1. I do think we should rename `IntegratableModule` to `RegistrableModule`

Author: I detailed why we shouldn't in the other similar comment.

> - The **StateMachineModule** can be accessed via the `bus` from any other `IntegratableModule`

Reviewer: I need to think more around accessing the `StateMachineModule` via the bus.

My immediate gut approach goes to a different model:
1. Modules emit events
2. The state machine is like a "Daemon" that determines if the state transition is relevant and logs things appropriately

I don't want modules to start checking "Am I in this state? Can I transition to a different state?"

Author: I think it's important to underline that this was meant to be a KISS implementation that I added mostly to help with other parts of the codebase since I had a similar use case in P2P. It's not perfect by design, also to identify the shape of the final thing.

Back to your comment:

I agree that changing state should be something that happens due to events but I think that for the sake of simplicity, in some cases, it might be useful to have the ability to simply query the state machine and check the current state.

Clearly it's not something that's meant to be polled, you have events for that. But for example when a module starts, it might be useful to just check if you are in state X or Y. Otherwise you have to start making assumptions and maybe even add event listeners that cancel themselves inside a `Start`. That all sounds needlessly complex to me. 

I agree that the interface of the StateMachine should be downsized. For now I am literally just exposing all the methods that the library offers to show what it can do.

Since you guys are flagging it, I am gonna axe some stuff. now.

Author: Edit: In the meantime... I have simplified the interface. Now it's (stongly typed) events only

> The key things to keep in mind are:
> 
> - We are using the library "github.com/looplab/fsm" to implement the FSM, essentially here we are wrapping it and integrating it with the rest of the modules. This document won't cover the implementation details of the FSM library which is fairly well documented.
> - The **StateMachineModule** can be accessed via the `bus` from any other `IntegratableModule`
> - State machine transitions will emit `StateMachineTransitionEvent` events that the modules that are interested can listen to.
> - The `node` has a main eventhandler for events that can be used to fan-out the handling to the aforementioned modules that listen to transition events

Reviewer: ```suggestion
High-level implementation details:

- The [github.com/looplab/fsm](https://github.com/looplab/fsm) library is used to implement the FSM
- Pocket builds a wrapper around `looplab/fsm` to integrate with the other modules
- The `StateMachineModule` can be accessed via the `bus` from any other `IntegratableModule`
- State machine transitions emit `StateMachineTransitionEvent` events that subscribed pocket modules can listen to
- The `node` has a central [event handler](../../shared/node.go) for events that fan-out event handling to the relevant modules during state transitions
```

Reviewer: I realize these are most nits, but thinking of "what text do I not need to write" really helps with improving documentation

These are the main building blocks:

- **Event**: An event is a string that represents an action that can trigger a transition. For example, the event `start` can be used to trigger a transition from the `stopped` state to the `starting` state.
- **State**: A state is a string that represents a state that the FSM can be in. For example, the state `stopped` can be used to represent a state where the node is not running.
- **Callback**: A callback is a function that is called when a transition occurs. For example, a callback can be used to log the transition or to perform some other action. (there are various types of callbacks that essentially drive the WHEN they are called and help building more complex behaviours like transition cancelling, etc. but we won't cover them here, please read the FSM library documentation for more details)

## Current State Machine Definition

A diagram of the current state machine definition can be found [here](state-machine.diagram.md)
If you make any changes to it, you can re-generate it via:

```bash
make generate_node_state_machine_diagram
```

> <!-- GITHUB_WIKI: state_machine -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- GITHUB_WIKI: state_machine/README -->
```
